---
Title: "The delicious intranet"
Slug: tasty-intranet
Date: 2004-08-23

---
The week before last, I discovered [the communal bookmarkathon that is
del.icio.us](http://del.icio.us/) via [Jon
Udell](http://weblog.infoworld.com/udell/2004/08/11.html#a1057). Since
then my team and I have been looking at the possibilities. One
possibility: improve our ageing intranet.

The del.icio.us approach is to let everyone classify everything they put
on the site (just URL's) in their own terms, in a simple flat
free-for-all of keywords. A bit like jelly wrestling (Jell-o wrestling,
in some parts of the world), only in keyword-soup rather than gelatine.
A system like this would allow our users to whack-up stuff and label it
however they want. But the official 'project view' could be maintained
by our (fully qualified, dynamic, talented) project manager. And HR
people could tag stuff that is relevant to new staff, naughty staff,
staff-member-of-the-month type staff, and so on without anybody having
to maintain taxonomies.

Is this the solution to the perennial problem with the intranet where
the classification system my team set up makes no sense to some users?
"Is this a Discussion Paper or a Form or a Procedure?" they wonder. And
they want to make their own classifications. Imagine that. "Can I make
my own folders?" they ask.

The NextEd Intranet is either a triumph of content management or a
@\#\$\^\*&\#@%, depending on who you talk to, and on what day. It is
metadata driven; when you add stuff to it, it wants to know which group
owns the content, what type of content it is, a title, and so on. It
then decides, in its almost infinite wisdom where to keep your content,
to let others browse and search their way to it. But any coercive
metadata gathering results in some pollution of the data. For example,
it wants an abstract for everything. It's amazing, really how many
people can supply an abstract that has *less* information in it than the
document title.

We have been talking for a while about an Intranet that does not coerce
people into providing information that may be flawed, but lets them get
their stuff in there, and lets the classifiers who are good at
abstracting content and organising things for their domain pull it in to
shape. Del.icio.us provides a good model.
