---
Title: "Del.icio.us RUBRIC bookmarks"
Slug: del.icio.us_rubric_bookmarks
Date: 2005-09-07

---
<div>

A while ago I [wrote
about](http://ptsefton.com/blog/2005/01/07/delicious_team)using the
public collaborative bookmarking / tagging system
[del.icio.us](http://del.icio.us/) to manage links for a team. We're
still using it in the Software Development Services team where I sit,
it's at least a good way to keep up with the kinds of things others are
finding useful.

As we start out on the RUBRIC project at USQ, Deidre Lowe (Project
Manager) and I (RUBRIC Techical Manager) have started using del.icio.us
to track bookmarks, keep each other informed about what we're looking
at, and start to build a library of resources.

We chose the tag `destrubric` for RUBRIC project on account of our
[DEST](http://dest.gov.au/) funding. We'll use a similar scheme for
tagging related DEST funded projects, eg
[destarrow](http://del.icio.us/tag/destrubric+destarrow).

To look at everyone's del.icio.us bookmarks for destrubric go to
<http://del.icio.us/tag/destrubric>.

To see just mine, you would look at
<http://del.icio.us/ptsefton/destrubric>.

To look for conferences we're interested in attending or at least
investigating:[](http://del.icio.us/tag/destrubric)<http://del.icio.us/tag/destrubric+conferences>.

And don't forget that all del.icio.us pages have RSS feeds. RSS is a
notification system that will alert you of new stuff. If you don't know
about RSS a good place to start is
[http://bloglines.com](http://bloglines.com/) sign up for a free account
and you can use it to track RSS and Atom feeds, meaning you can keep
track of many many websites without visiting them.

 

 

 

****

 

</div>
