---
Title: "The best thing about blogs"
Slug: the_best_thing_about_blogs
Date: 2004-08-02

---
I have been thinking a lot about weblogs, *blogs* to their friends.
There are a lot of ways to start an argument on this topic, so I will
confine myself to one way. The best thing about blogs.

In most cases, blogging software has introduced a very clear separation
between the document and the way it served on the web as part of a
weblog, or via an update-notification feed like RSS or Atom. This is the
much sought-after separation between content and presentation in use by
millions of people. The biggest achievement has been in getting users
used to typing words into something and then letting the weblog software
work out how to display the thing. The something they type into can be a
form field, or a simple client, or an in-browser editor, or Microsoft
Outlook, or a text editor. Bloggers typically get to see their writing
on a page with other writings, in an archive, and in a feed that
notifies readers of new material. That is they see it in a few different
guises from one input. There is usually some kind of template system
that makes all the posts look the same automatically.

Why is this important?

Because it has broken the one-to-one relationship between text and
presentation.

I think this has prepared the way to extend
write-once-publish-to-multiple-contexts beyond somewhat-one-track-minded
weblogs to a more general publishing system. I have written about this
before in [Don't just blog this](blog/2004/06/04/blog_this_indeed); a
plea for more general purpose publishing services that go beyond the
weblog genre.

Personally I want this kind of separation between content and
presentation to be broader, to deal with intranets, general web sites,
courseware, every kind of document I deal with, including birthday party
invitations and treasure maps. And we need print as well. At
[work](http://www.nexted.com) I have been involved in building a system
that does just this (and yes a staff member has configured it to run a
blog, and no you can't go and have a look, it's for his family).

I predict that as the weblog community grows, more community members
will demand that their word processor can feed a content store that
drives internal and external websites, and they will still be able to
print their document in a reasonably presentable way, and drop in bits
of spreadsheets and so on. The main component to enable this is a server
engine that can accept content, help you classify it so it goes to the
right places with the right notifications. The content will be able to
come from a full word processor, in addition to all the weblog editor
options listed above.

This post was inspired by
[piece](http://www.justinelarbalestier.com/Musings/notablog.htm) by
someone I know from uni days, Justine Larbalestier, who is an *actual
author*:

> This is not a blog.
>
> The blog is a form that doesn't suit me. I'm not interested in having
> to have special software to write my musings. And I'm allergic to
> diaries.

Justine writes her musings (grudgingly) in Word, and then pastes them
into DreamWeaver to add to her site. She is a potential user for a
system that lets her work in Word, or something even better, and would
be able to handle the business of making good HTML for her words and
putting them on her site, updating the index page and feeding
notifications to readers. But guess what? It can't be just a blogging
tool, because Justine wisely does not self-identify as a blogger, even
if *technically* her site is similar to a blog (I sympathise with her
stance, I have to make the same kinds of declarations myself. I'm not a
geek, ok?). Justine already has the separation between the authoring
environment and the web site, and does some manual labour (yuck) to
bridge the gap. But software to do the labour for her should no longer
be considered 'special'.

Lets build it!
