---
Title: "Posters at OR07"
Slug: oro7posters
Date: 2007-01-26

---
<div>

Yesterday evening the [poster
sessions](http://openrepositories.org/program/posters) were held at
OR07.

There was this 'Minute Madness' thing where speakers had one minute to
promote their posters. <span class="spCh spCh0xa0"> </span>I got to
spruik my poster on ICE-RS, which you can [see on the ICE
website](http://ice.usq.edu.au/presentations/or07/ice-rs.htm), with the
usual PDF, OpenDocument and presentation formats. Apparently my minute
of fame was a bit scary, mainly because my slide had a leering picture
of me on it, but it may also have had something to do with the way I
**frothed at the mouth about PDF documents** and Microsoft Powerpoint
presentations being the standard for an open repositories conference. I
might have **taken the madness bit too literally**.

And I got to be Nigel Ward for 40 seconds, talking about the poster for
FRED.

**Caroline Ayers presented two posters,** on data migration and server
virtualization and received job offers, invitations to speak at
conferences and marriage proposals. We'll have to get web-readable
versions of those up ASAP. And no, she didn't get marriage proposals.

Best poster went to *Format Conversion in DSpace using OpenOffice.org,*
by <span class="spCh spCh0xa0"> </span>Tim Donohue. <span
class="spCh spCh0xa0"> </span>I'm pleased that **document conversion is
on the agenda**. I found [this
example](http://ideals.uiuc.edu/handle/2142/11) of the system in action;
this allows you to put word documents in DSpace and make PDFs
automatically, apparently. More on this later.

</div>
