---
Title: "Learning Management Systems at Ausweb"
Slug: woulfe
Date: 2004-07-20

---
Some bloggers post word-by-word commentaries of conferences they are
attending. Here we are a little bit slower.

On Tuesday July 6th, my colleague Mins McCauley and I attended a session
which included a paper by Jim Woulfe, who works for one of NextEd's
clients, ["the Australian Centre for Languages"
acl](http://www.acl.edu.au/). (It turns out that Jim and I share a bit
of background in [Systemic
Linguistics](http://www.wagsoft.com/Systemics/Definition/definition.html),
I became suspicious when he referred to some writing done by a young
relative as a 'text').

Jim's
[paper](http://ausweb.scu.edu.au/aw04/papers/refereed/woulfe/paper.html)
gives a sample of some of the real-world issues in using an
off-the-shelf Learning Management System (A NextEd customised version of
Blackboard 4) for distributed delivery, and discusses the relationship
between an educational institution and a technology supplier.

At Ausweb the idea is that you read the papers before attending the
sessions, the presentations are short, and there is plenty of time for
discussion at the end with all the presenters. Jim's short presentation
involved a relationship metaphor â€” the pick-up, moving in together,
discovering that NextEd is a slob, the visit to the marriage guidance
counsellor, and so on (and no, Jim did not say all that, that's my
little joke).

We're not quite up to the happy ending, but there is some hope for the
relationship, in the form of NextEd's forthcoming "Distributed Learning
System", an LMS for the kind of intensive remote delivery that is a
problem for centralised monolithic systems like Blackboard, and that
brings the action much closer to the learners than a typical web system.
