---
Title: "Mobile future. Clear as MUD"
Slug: mobile_future._clear_as_mud
Date: 2004-11-08

---
The incredible Russell Beattie is
[thinking](http://www.russellbeattie.com/notebook/1008146.html) *hard*
about mobile telephones and what they're going to mean.

[wrote\_about\_mobiles\_and\_muds](update:_russell_points_out_that_he_<a_class=)\_recently.\_i\_must\_have\_seen\_that\_and\_forgotten.\_see\_the\_comments\_at\_his\_site."\>Update:
Russell points out that he [wrote about mobiles and
MUDs](http://www.russellbeattie.com/notebook/1008025.html) recently. I
must have seen that and forgotten. See the
[comments](http://www.russellbeattie.com/notebook/1008146.html#1011439)
at his site.

Me, I sympathize, although for now I'm happy with the Nokia 5210 (or is
it a 5120?) my girlfriend discarded. But the young people really like
these mobiles. The aforementioned girlfriend has a girlfriend who'd be
not a day over 38 and she's *always* texting. Not to mention the
thirteen yearold niece, who apparently prefers SMS, and MSN to voice,
even to face to face.

Me, I've been playing with Linux. I can now SSH from anywhere (work,
anyway) to the computer I bought from my previous employer for \$25 and
type at it in my rusty, faltering Unix. So much more satisfying than all
that gauche windowesque gesticulating with the mouse. Linux and I know
each other so well it can finish my sentences (hit Tab and it guesses
what you mean, just like a modern mobile works out what you are typing).

See where I'm going with this?

While Russell points out that watching *Finding Nemo* on a telephone is
pretty cool, I wonder if maybe the young person's preference for txt
would extend to user interface. What does it mean when I type '57' on my
mobile keypad? Is it 'jp' or is it 'ls' the Unix directory-listing
command? And the N-orth E-ast S-outh W-est of a text based
[adventure](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Adventure_%28disambiguation%29)
game would still work as M D P W.

(And wouldn't any committed [vi user](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vi)
be happy with an even more modal interface?

> vi can frustrate new users, because it is a modal editor. A modal
> editor (or any modal program) assigns different meanings to buttons or
> keystrokes depending on which editing mode is active.

)

I'm not sure what Russell's application, the one that will get him out
of his pyjamas and into the boardroom, will look like. But maybe it will
be [MUDlike](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MUD). I'd try to explain MUD's
here but I can't. If you don't know follow the
[link](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MUD) to the Wikepedia and set aside
a few hours...

(Interestingly that [Wikipedia
article](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MUD) asserts that "Still others
[MUDs](muds), especially those which are based on MOOs, are used in
distance education or to allow for virtual conferences." But sadly it
provides no links.)

Maybe the killer mobile app has a text based interface, and maybe it's a
sort of MUDlike projection of meatspace into the virtual realm, a place
you can wander about like an adept Systems Administrator using only the
keypad with some very smart predictive software and a very well chosen
vocabulary, chatting, fighting, making lurve, and leaving messages on
the walls.

Communicontent.

One of Russell's correspondents, commentors, whatever,
[says](http://the.taoofmac.com/space/blog/2004-11-07.13%3A17) "The
limited UI, however, forces us to classify that user data and its
dependencies, and to do that meta-data is essential."

I dunno about this metadata stuff or nothin', but I don't think
'limited' is the way to think about it. If it's good enough for a
teenager to make her preferred medium of communication then maybe it's
*empowering*.

\$LastChangedDate: 2004-11-08 14:35:32 -0600 (Mon, 08 Nov 2004) \$ -
\$Rev: 24 \$
