---
Title: "Test Driven Development; A Sort-of Rant."
Slug: tdd
Date: 2004-06-14

---
Tim Bray is now exhorting users of Test Driven Development to [do some
ranting](http://www.tbray.org/ongoing/When/200x/2004/06/13/TDD2004). Aye
aye.

This piece rambles on about holiday camps, abseiling and so on for a
while but there is stuff about computers at the end. It may or may not
be an actual rant.

I used to work for [Derek Lucas, at
Chakola](http://www.operationchallenge.com.au/staff/lucas.htm), a kind
of holiday-camp-turned-experiential-education-centre. ([This
story](http://www.allegro.cc/members/profile.php?_id=2088) is partly
true). Huge feet, he had (has) for a short bloke, measuring only about 6
feet tall or so. I think I still have a pair of boots he gave me that he
used to climb some minor Himalayas. They each weigh more than my smaller
kid, even at age 4.

From Derek I learned a lot about ropes and cliffs and safety, not to
mention how to drink [whisky](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Whiskey),
although I figured out how to drink
[whiskey](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Whiskey) all by myself.
Regrettably I have never learnt to drink wysgi.

Thanks to Derek, you can throw me a rope and I can tie a bowline around
my waist with one hand, in a big hurry, which will no doubt save my life
one day. Now that I think about it I can't remember if I practiced with
my left hand. What if the right hand has been bitten off by a [drop
bear](http://www.anu.edu.au/ANDC/Austwords/dropbear.html), or I have
hacked it off to free myself from a, a, I don't know.

I can also set up a 'Z' pulley system and pull you out of a crevasse.
Well, a ropes course anyway.

And the very finest alarm clock you can have is Derek waking you at 5am
and telling you in quiet but compelling voice that there is a 'meeting
in the kitchen'. If you feel like inventing something, invent an alarm
clock like D. Lucas
[AOM](http://www.itsanhonour.gov.au/about/medal_descriptions/order_of_australia.html).
Something that gives you a very liberal shot of adrenaline, never mind
the [melatonin](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Melatonin). Throw in an
east London accent and you'll never work again.

Derek is very fond of rescuing people. You don't get to do it much in a
well run 'olidee camp, so the next best thing is practicing. We used to
spend a fair bit of time being stuck half way down an abseil (I always
found that a bit rapellent) or dangling from a waist belt (ten minutes
to live) off Lucas' over-engineered 'death slide'.

Before a client got anywhere near any of the activities they had been
tested for all the failures one could reasonably and unreasonably
expect. What if someone lets go of the belay? What if the client gets
her foot stuck here? What if member of staff Catherine Sefton, my dear
sister, falls off this rope bridge on her way out to practice a rescue?
(Nobody thought of that one. Put it down to natural selection that I
rescued her and she has now bred.)

Derek built the tests first, and ran them before every group came
through, testing staff, process and equipment routinely and mercilessly.

Later, when I accidentally enrolled in an Associate Diploma of Outdoor
Education, AKA Adventure Leadership, at the *Bendigo College of Advanced
Education*. I bounced in full of Lucasoid enthusiasm for disaster. In
rock-climbing 101, on the very first abseil off a great big granite
boulder, I slipped a couple of loops of 6mm cord into my pocket (for
rescuing myself), went halfway down, tied off, and called out that I was
stuck and would they mind pulling me up. "We don't do rescues until week
3" they said. Short negotiations followed and I untied my impromptu
tangle and slid down. They had to look up the 'Z' pulley up in a book,
the poor things. Luckily they beat all that practicing and rescuing out
of me quick smart to prevent any further disruption to the timetable. I
hope all the CIOs, CTOs and other C-TLAs are taking note.

All this does have something to do with computers. The kinds of drills
that Derek Lucas does on his ropes courses and games were like test
driven development. He does it to keep the clients alive and happy,
which funnily enough makes for more clients in the future. It works the
same in IT, except that most of us don't risk killing the dear things,
just our professionalism.

Derek Lucas taught me a lot, for a short bloke. I just relaxed and
forgot most of it for twenty years. Since I came to my senses I have
been using TDD with my team at work and [as noted
before](blog/2004/05/17/xslt_unit_testing) it takes a bit of work. To
improve myself even further I now realise that I need to pretend that I
am back in Kangaroo Valley and re-live, with the kind clarity you get
when 'my liege' Derek Lucas, AOM is your CEO, COO and CRO (Chief Ropes
Officer), that testing is not something we do in week three. It's
something we do every day, with every line of code, every knot we tie.

Finally, the most valuable thing Derek taught me? Well he called it a
lorry driver's hitch, but we call it a truckie's hitch. You can [learn
it](http://www.cybernex.net.au/clubs/pathfind/Resources/Knots_Truckies_Hitch.html)
on the internet for free, amongst millions of other places.
