---
Author: ptsefton
Comments: true
Date: 2012-02-06 04:00:06+00:00
Slug: 2011-3

Title: '2011'
Wordpress_id: 1015
---

It’s been very quiet here at media empire ptsefton.com. I’m still alive,
and working, just not blogging a lot during a house and job move, and
over the break. Thought I’d quickly sum up 2011.

To put the end at the beginning, in November I started at the University
of Western Sydney as the Manager, eResearch. Whatever that is. I’ll post
soon about the things that I’m thinking about now which should make that
a bit clearer:

1.  How to license research data for re-use (this is hard ‘cos copyright
    doesn’t always apply and the advice from those in the know here
    Australia is at odds with that coming from abroad).

2.  A new eResearch infrastructure project for UWS – “The Research Data
    Repository”.

3.  Issues around ‘the death of files’ and the threat to open enquiry
    posed by vertically integrated computing platforms (like, you know,
    the iBooks Author play to make iPads compulsory in schools [via
    license restrictions about re-selling
    content](http://venomousporridge.com/post/16126436616/ibooks-author-eula-audacity),
    if that approach starts creeping into tools used for research).

4.  The usual stuff, like the global politics of open research, such as
    the threatening US Research Works Act, [put here into an Australian
    context](http://theconversation.edu.au/a-small-bill-in-the-us-a-giant-impact-for-research-worldwide-4996?utm_source=twitter&utm_medium=tweetbutton&utm_campaign=article-bottom)
    by Danny Kingsley.

As of February 2012, the family is installed in a new house in the Blue
Mountains – we have a lovely view of some parts of the mountains, but I
want my money back, they’re not blue. Not really. And half the time
they’re missing in the clouds, you  know like research data is likely to
be circa 2014 if we don’t plan properly. (If you embrace “the end of
files” then make sure you know where the cp –r ./my-cloud-service \~
command is.)

![](/blog/2011-post/0.png)

Figure 1 Be careful with clouds, make sure that you always have all the
data management services needed to see your data

In January 2011 Professor Gilly Salmon arrived in Toowoomba and led a
re-vamp of the Australian Digital Futures Institute, which involved
removing the technical team I used to lead there. With the exception of
Ron Ward, who found other work at USQ that meant everyone in the
software R&D lab was either redundant or, if they were on contract, just
gone. Congratulations to Linda Octalina Lucido and Oliver Lucido on the
birth of their daughter just after the house cleaning – she was so very
nearly an ADFI baby.

Sadly, for those at USQ who were so excited to have attracted
international talent of such stature, Gilly has now [moved on to
Swinburne in
Melbourne](http://www.swinburne.edu.au/chancellery/mediacentre/media-centre/news/2011/11/online-education-expert-joins-swinburne). 
Anyway, I’m sure the other ex-ADFI peeps all wish Gilly well in her new
role Down South.

(Gilly and Swinburne, if I could be so bold as to make a suggestion: why
not follow up the [zoo
metaphor](http://www2.le.ac.uk/departments/beyond-distance-research-alliance/mediazoo/research-on-learning-technologies)
at Leicester and [space at USQ](http://adfi.usq.edu.au) with a CIRCUS
theme at Swinburne. It is, after all the only Australian university with
its own [circus institute](http://www.nica.com.au/). I know, it’s easy
to make jokes about some of the clowns we’ve all known in our time at
university, but I think Gilly might bring something special to the
circus metaphor with her special talent for branding and her research
degree in change management.)

![](/blog/2011-post/1.png)

Figure 2 The ADFI home page, with its retro space look

![](/blog/2011-post/2.png)

Figure 3 The “media zoo” site with its zoo-map motif

Moving on, [I recovered from my
sadness](http://ptsefton.com/2011/03/24/onwards.htm) about having to
leave USQ by doing a couple of gigs for JISC in the UK via the
universities of Edinburgh ([jiscPUB](http://jiscpub.blogs.edina.ac.uk/))
and Bath (jiscHTML5), and even managed to convince Paul Walk at UKOLN,
Bath to let me help out with the developer challenge at Open
Repositories 2011 in Austin where I made someone’s ‘most random’ list.
It was only mid-year, so maybe something randommer happened later:

> [onothimagen: Wish I’d been there! RT @jamestoon: Just seen @ptsefton
> go past the window on a segway. Most random thing I’ve seen all year.
> \#OR11](http://richard.relocution.com/?p=2063 "Permanent Link to onothimagen: Wish I’d been there! RT @jamestoon: Just seen @ptsefton go past the window on a segway. Most random thing I’ve seen all year. #OR11")

(I was wearing my bright-pink-tie-dye festival shirt in honour of the
Republic of Texas Biker rally that was also in town. The Segway thing
was OK, but I think next time I’ll take a cycle tour.)

I have been trying to join the conference calls for the committee for
[OR12, to be held in Edinburgh](http://or2012.ed.ac.uk/), but those
conference calls to meet up with the US and Europe are not so much fun
if you’re the one in GMT+11.  3am. Too early to call it getting up and
much too late to stay up on a school night. Still I’ll try to stay
connected as I want to help drive the developer stream at that
conference. There’s also a small team trying start up a series of events
to build the developer community in eResearch in Australia. We’re
looking at having a few small meet-ups starting soon, and planning for
something bigger at eResearch Australasia 2012.

I enjoyed the THAT camp in Canberra in October, where I caused a session
to happen on [citation formats and
technology](http://thatcampcanberra.org/2011/10/03/the-tyranny-of-citation-formats/)
and I’ll try to make it back for the ‘real’ [digital humanities
conference](http://dhh.anu.edu.au/news-and-events/digital-humanities-australasia-2012-conference-building-mapping-connecting)
in Canberra in March.

A good chunk of the technical work at ADFI has been rescued, and
continues in more sympathetic surroundings. One of the benefits of
having open code is that it’s possible to re-home a project if needed.
This happened with the [ReDBox Research Data
Catalogue](https://sites.google.com/site/redboxmint/), conceived by
Vicki Picasso’s team at Newcastle and my late team at USQ and funded by
ANDS. When ADFI tech team shut down, the open license meant that it
could be continued reasonably simply. It had to be housed a different
university because of that whole redundancy HR thing, and USQ missed out
on the cash-flow and know-how but hey, people can move, and drag their
families along, right? For me it’s gratifying to see the work I helped
establish keep moving on, the product keep growing, and new institutions
start to install it. Thanks Duncan Dickinson and Greg Pendlebury now of
QCIF/CQU and thank you to our ANDS overlords who insist on open
licenses. Who knows, maybe even USQ will join in the ReDBox party.

On a related note, I hear that the ICE system at USQ, which I helped
develop might be nearing end of life (the palliative care on systems can
drag on a bit though so I’d expect it to hang on for a while yet). So
assuming USQ still wants to put stuff on the web rather than just
writing content for iPads using iBooks Author, this recent exploratory
work I did on [Word to
HTML](http://ptsefton.com/2011/10/18/worddown-word-to-html5-conversion-tool.htm)
might come in handy with all those old course documents in .doc format.
It’s Open Source, so feel free to use it and let me know how it goes.
(And of course ICE is capital-F Free as well, so any users or teams who
like it can install their own and keep using it)

My 2011 freelance adventure did let me spend lots of time with the and
his ever longer tongue[<span
class="MsoFootnoteReference"></span>](#_ftn1) dog (he’s a Friesian
cheese hound in case you’re wondering, the only one in Australia, the
only issue is you have to remember to say
[sitte](http://www.archive.org/stream/phonologygrammar00sipmuoft#page/164/mode/2up/search/sitte)
rather than plain old sit):

![](/blog/2011-post/3.png)

Figure 4 The dog, Bootsy, who only understands commands in West Frisian

But I like my new job at UWS, even if there are no space ships and we
lack marketing pizazz like,
[say](http://adfi.usq.edu.au/neighbourhood.html):

> “The technological firmament is endlessly fascinating and complex.
> Here we are flying past sparkling technologies, some of them
> unimaginably large and influential. We will understand the
> significance and relevance and the extent of their orbits. Humans can
> visit distant learning opportunities and return safely with richer
> understandings.”

Or [this](http://adfi.usq.edu.au/milkyway.html):

> “Beyond the ‘gravitational well’ of our familiar environment, we seek
> how technologies can broaden and deepen learning journeys; making them
> more relevant and context sensitive.”

So far.

</div>
