---
Title: "Ultra cheap DIY bike trailer made from a moving trolley"
Slug: new_trailer
Date: 2006-09-19

---
<div>

Another cycling post. You have been warned. This is how I made a usable
bicycle trailer for around \$25 Australian ('cos of a Father's day
special at SuperCheap Auto – add \$6 at other times of year).

I'd been thinking about getting a bicycle trailer for some time.
Actually, since our kids were little, when I considered getting one of
those kid trailer / strollers. But the kids are bigger now and can ride
their own bikes.

I wanted a trailer for going to the markets, in case I get a whole box
of apples or a tray of mangoes or some plants, and for going grocery
shopping.

Thought about making a trailer using wheelchair wheels or wheels off a
bike, even started making [one like
this](http://www.motherearthnews.com/printable/1981_July_August/Dime_on_the_Dollar_Bicycle_Trailer)
in a half hearted way. But making a trailer is complicated.

After some deliberation I decided that the best buy was the BicycleR
evolution line, [distributed in Australia by Chainring Transit
Authority](http://chainringtransitauthority.com/store/shopper/shopper.shtml).
But they're out of stock at present.

Anyway, recently my partner, the long suffering Sandra, asked me to get
her a moving trolley cos they were on special for \$20. That's an
astounding price for a heavy steel thing that's been shipped from China
to Toowoomba. It has 10” pneumatic tyres that claim to be good for 250kg
(each!) at 30psi. I think the flyer says that it can move 250kg. Maybe
not with bits cut off it, though.

Looking at the thing I saw it had a bike trailer inside it. All I had to
do was cut off the bits that were not part of a trailer.

I bought me another one and took a hacksaw to it.

<span
id="graphics7"></span>![graphics7](/blog/2006/09/19/new_trailer/1.jpg)

But even with those bits cut off and the stumps capped with rubber
chair-feet it can still be a trolley.

Here's the trailer reverting to being a trolley at the PCYC markets in
Toowoomba.

<span
id="graphics1"></span>![graphics1](/blog/2006/09/19/new_trailer/2.jpg)

Here's the trailer coming home from the markets, with the box of veges
flipped 90<span class="T1">°</span>. (If you look closely you can see
that the box has sprung a leek :-)

<span
id="graphics2"></span>![graphics2](/blog/2006/09/19/new_trailer/3.jpg)

And later the same Sunday the 6 year old and I took it all the way from
our place near Queen's Park up East Creek to Stenner St and then to the
retailer called 'The Good Guys' to buy a new microwave oven. We made it.
No speedo on the old bike but that's got to be more than 12km round
trip.

We were all impressed with both the boy and the new trailer.

<span
id="graphics3"></span>![graphics3](/blog/2006/09/19/new_trailer/4.jpg)

On Monday morning his back tyre was flat, possibly tired from the long
trip – so the kids ended up going to school in the car (gasp!). But I
was home early enough to replace the inner tube and give the trailer
another run. I took their bikes up to school to collect them.

<span
id="graphics4"></span>![graphics4](/blog/2006/09/19/new_trailer/5.jpg)

Have a look at the high tech hitch. It doesn't have too much play in it,
even though it looks like it might.

<span
id="graphics5"></span>![graphics5](/blog/2006/09/19/new_trailer/6.jpg)

That's a ¼” bolt, two washers, two nuts and a wing-nut some black tape
and a bit of climbing cord. And a clove-hitch and a figure-of-eight
knot. I'm not tying this to [my Trek
520](http://ptsefton.com/blog/2006/08/10/520_at_2000km) just yet – need
to work out a less scratchy method.

The [Bikes at work
website](http://www.bikesatwork.com/hauling-cargo-by-bike/bicycle-trailer-guide-2.html)
(they sell trailers) recommends a hitch that attaches to the lower left
side of the bicycle frame, like mine. It doesn't recommend using a bit
of rope, though. I thought of that by myself.

And the best thing? Lots of people write about how their trailer is so
quiet and tracks so well that they forget it's there. You aren't going
to forget this one. It makes a noise, like, um, a \$20 moving trolley
being dragged along too fast.

# <span id="id869429"></span>Caveats

1.  I would **not trust this device at high speed**. It is **possibly
    unsafe** at low speed as well.

2.  Right turns are not what they used to be, some low-speed shuffling
    may be required.

3.  I have no idea how long the cord hitch will last. My cord is very
    strong but it is not meant to be used like this.

4.  You need to be really really careful going up and down curbs if you
    have a load on it with a high centre of gravity, like, say two
    bikes. I have not tipped it over yet in real life, but I did flip it
    riding over piles of dirt in the front yard on the very first test
    runs.

5.  Your mileage may vary.

6.  And **don't use a hitch like this one** with an eye bolt made out of
    soft steel. It lasted 2km. I loaded it up with firewood and bricks
    and then when that worked two children (with their helmets of
    course). Must have been about 70kg total.

<span
id="graphics6"></span>![graphics6](/blog/2006/09/19/new_trailer/7.jpg)

</div>
