---
Title: "Getting things done"
Slug: gtd
Date: 2004-11-22

---
I have recently discovered [Getting things
done](http://www.davidco.com/) by David Allen. I read it through and on
the way reinvented my life. No really, I did. Ask the long suffering
Sandra.

There's a very active gtd meme on the web - you can track it using
del.icio.us by watching the [gtd tag](http://del.icio.us/tag/gtd) or try
the [most popular](http://del.icio.us/popular/gtd). I first came across
this via [James
Tauber](http://jtauber.com/blog/2004/09/19/43_folders:_the_latest_addition_to_my_blogroll),
and read about it on [43
Folders](http://www.43folders.com/2004/09/how_does_a_nerd.html).

The main things I got out of the book were:

-   Capturing stuff. I captured all the tangible crap in my bedside
    drawer and the cables and so on stuffed in boxes and put them into
    labeled plastic drawers and file boxes and wrote down all the
    intangible crap in my head.

<!-- -->

-   Using the calendar. Anything I really need to do or tasks that have
    been hanging around for too long now goes on the calendar. And I
    take the calendar seriously. Check it every morning after walking
    the fierce black hounds and make sure it's all done or gets
    accounted for (everything except tax-return related tasks. I love
    paying tax, I just don't like the bit where I have to *do* stuff).

<!-- -->

-   Process notes. I never got this before, but it is essential to read
    back through notes and process them. I used to think people wrote
    stuff down and never looked at it again.

It's true that once you get stuff out of your head and onto paper your
head works better. It stops constantly scanning the list of things to do
and is free to think about other stuff, like songs you'd like to write
one day or how to build a recumbent solar coffee maker.

One side effect, though, is that I have now started doing stupid stuff
like putting on coffee and leaving the jug off the Atomic when I make
the 7am cuppa. Mind like water. Mind that's given up on worrying about
little details.

Not a black belt yet, but here's my emerging system.

### Gear

I now carry a 35c notebook (a Quill Q560), if my mind like water and I
haven't left it in the post office, and whatever pen is to hand. In this
I put stuff I will need, like the address for the mechanic, or shopping
lists for on the way home. I use it to take notes. Used to delight in
*not* taking notes, going right back to Uni days. Thought it was cool.
Actually it is, and I can remember stuff, but I am also very good at
remembering to forget stuff. On Monday morning, if not before, I process
the notes into Outlook as tasks and events, or I put them into documents
either on the at-work network or into my home system.

At work I have a Windows XP machine, but I spend a lot of time in Linux
via some kind of magic X thing. At home I have an immobile Linux laptop.

The \$25 linux server at home now runs subversion, or I can connect with
a terminal using [ssh](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SSH) so I can work
on my projects from anywhere (not that I'd do it at work of course, but
it is handy to be able to grab a template or a draft or something from
the home network).

Why Outlook? It's there at work, backed up by Exchange so tasks are
available from home over the web. It is simple to take a task and drag
it onto the calendar when it becomes time-critical.

I had visions of using Evolution from Linux to talk to exchange and
getting the Palm 3c back in action, but it's all too hard at this stage,
and I'm getting to like the notebook.

Part of me wants to do something really geekish using Emacs but this
works well.

Also got a desk, an in-box (currently empty!), and a label maker. I'm
not so happy about having a label maker, although David Allen insists
that it is going to improve matters. I like the labels but I hate having
yet another machine that creates waste. The best thing about it so far
is that it proved that the 4 year old can read 'SEFTON' when I labeled a
ukulele we have recently acquired. Another life changing event, getting
a uke.

### Task management

Tasks I keep in folders related to the context in which the task can be
done on Exchange; /home, /usq, /shopping, /waiting and so on. The
advantage of having home stuff there is that when I think of something
at work I can add a task and get it off my mind. I am experimenting with
using the body of the task, which is a text field, to keep track of
projects. The task title is the next action that's required and when I
do that action I open up the task and pick the next thing to do as a new
title. Also using the tasks to write blog postings like this one, in a
wiki-style markup which I later add to the site via copy and paste in to
a web form, or via a text file.

### Filing

When I was at uni I used to work casually at a gear shop, selling tents
and backpacks and suchlike. That was were I got my previous experience
with filing. There used to be these rock climbing types there who used
stainless steel bolts for protection on climbs. They would drill holes
and stick in the bolts. They did some sort of machining on them before
they used them. I heard them talking one day about it "We'll have to
file those bolts before the weekend". I put them under B in the filing
cabinet. Hehe. Took them days and days to figure it out.

I have now convinced myself to file the kind of stuff that I used to
leave lying around on any flat surface. Sometimes on not so flat
surfaces as well. This was one of the biggest hurdles for me. It
required (a) a new desk that's mine and has a file drawer (b) a change
in my bad attitude. If it's worth keeping then it might as well be in
the file drawer as on the office floor, or balanced on top of the
router, eh.

### Habits

The systems I have in place are only as good as the habits that keep
them running. So far I am processing notes, respecting the calendar, and
being much less messy than I used to be.

I have a new rule that once a new flat surface is exposed I will not put
crap down on it anymore. This includes the bedroom floor, and the
sideboard, and so on. Getting there. We have a big house, so it can
sometimes be quite a long walk to the right place to put something but
I'm trying.

Backsliding can't be far away though.

\$LastChangedDate: 2004-11-22 05:51:16 -0600 (Mon, 22 Nov 2004) \$
\$Rev: 65 \$
