---
Title: "XML as hill 2"
Slug: xml_as_hill_2
Date: 2004-07-29

---
Today I gave my presentation at Open Publish 2004 in Sydney. The
[abstract](http://www.openpublish.com.au/program.asp?myCategory=PresentationDetail&myPresID=139)
promised that I would talk about some of the challenges and issues in
education publishing, for online learning, and how the current Learning
Management Systems in our corner of the market handle content. So I did.

I decided that I would put a bit of effort into the presentation as
narrative this time, and wrapped up the talk in the [XML as 'hill'
metaphor](blog/2004/05/03/potentialenergy), the one that likens
structure in an XML file to potential energy, giving you a downhill run
when rendering. First I checked with Ian Sefton, my dad, the retired
physics lecturer. He said "that's a good metaphor" but *were* well into
the fourth bottle at the time.

I had a Power-Point presentation ([see it here in
PDF](2004/EducationalPublishing.pdf) courtesy of OpenOffice.org) if you
want to. I think a used PowerPoint presentation is a bit like a used
condom, but because of the broken 13 month old IBM T40, which let me
down, this one has not been used. I was tweaking this right up to the
point, ten minutes before my session, where the computer refused to
start up. No lights, no noise, not with either of the batteries or the
power supply. So I had a choice of retrieving the day-old backup I
emailed to myself, and borrowing a machine, or giving an actual talk,
without PowerPoint.

I did it without PowerPoint, and you know what? It wasn't too bad.

In summary this is what I talked about:

-   *Outlined the context*. NextEd is working with customers who by and
    large are concerned with distributed delivery of learning services,
    meaning that content must be able to be delivered remotely.

<!-- -->

-   *The main players in the University oriented Learning Management
    System market are not good for building webs of linked content for
    distance education*, they encourage you to upload whatever you have
    (usually MS Office documents). This is OK for handouts in on-campus
    deployments, but will not work for distributed delivery where other
    people teach your course off-shore.

<!-- -->

-   *The XML as hill metaphor, together with the author as cyclist
    metaphor* to talk about the importance of picking the right tool,
    and the right template/schema for your authors. You can get them to
    pedal up hill (ie encode potential energy into their documents) if
    they get a small reward; a downhill coast. That is, they will follow
    a standard if they can see the point, such as a web-site of their
    course building before their eyes. They will not cooperate if you
    ask them to climb too steep a hill for no apparent reason.

<!-- -->

-   *Gave an outline of what good a good course content management
    system would look like*; which by some weird coincidence looks like
    the one that I have helped build at NextEd - the Continuous
    Publishing System.

<!-- -->

-   *Took a small risk* and likened university lecturers to
    five-year-olds. But I think I got away with it. I did explain that I
    like five-year-olds. Unfortunately we are out of stock until next
    year.

After the session, I got the computer out and fiddled with it for twenty
minutes, swapped the batteries (again) and it came good, but I had
already survived without it.
