---
Title: "Trek 520: 2000km update"
Slug: 520_at_2000km
Date: 2006-08-10

---
<div>

The most popular page ever on this site, by far, is the [one about my
Trek 520](http://ptsefton.com/blog/2006/02/07/new_bike:_trek_520)
touring bike which I bought in Toowoomba, in Australia, where I live.

Here it is – on my feral driveway.

<span
id="graphics1"></span>![graphics1](/blog/2006/08/10/520_at_2000km/1.png)

A couple of regular readers were annoyed that I strayed from the normal
fare of word processing and XML but it brings me a steady stream of
Googlers. I might figure out how to start up separate feeds for
technical posts and cycling posts. Maybe. Anyway, there will be a couple
more cycling posts coming soon. We have a new bike in the shed that I
**need** to talk about.

One of the nice things about posting about the Trek 520 was meeting one
Simon Troman online. He emailed me with some advice about the numb toes
I was getting from the [Specialized Body Geometry Comp MTB
shoes](http://specialized.com/bc/SBCEqProduct.jsp?spid=12749).

Simon suggested that this might be due to soft soles, causing the shoe
to flex over the pedal. Not in this case – my shoes are very stiff.
Subsequent discussion suggests I should try moving the cleats back a
bit. I haven't tried that yet. I have a feeling my toes might hit the
mudguard (fender) if I do. But with thick socks in winter I have not
been doing the shoes up as tightly as I did in summer with no socks and
I'm having fewer problems with the toes.

Simon works for a Canberra bike shop part time. I've never been there,
but based on Simon's willingness to help me out over the net I'd
recommend a visit if you happen to be shopping for a bike in Canberra.
Try [Bike Culture in
O’Connor](http://ww2.whereis.com/mapping/geocodeAddress.do?streetNumber=7&streetName=Sargood&streetType=St&locality=O&state=ACT&placeName=Bike%20Culture&address=7%20Sargood%20St%20O&phoneNumber=(02)%206262%209233&link=1155188163035&hashCode=146313432242024&brandId=5).
They can sell you a Trek, I gather.

Anyway, at around 7 months of age the bike has now done 2000km, mostly
on the home, school, work, shops, home run so I thought I'd give an
update.

Everything still works, as you'd expect from a decent bit of machinery.
In contrast, the \$340 Apollo mountain bike that preceded it was was
starting to show its age after this kind of mileage with gears not
shifting properly and brakes a bit funny, not to mention the broken back
axle (but then it was carrying me and a 20kg kid 15km per day 3 days a
week).

The Trek 520 doesn't look new anymore – there are a few scuffs on the
frame from bike racks, and collisions with children and the like.

A few minor issues:

1.  Handlebar tape is getting a bit uneven – maybe this is normal.

2.  Mudguard is a bit bent. This is due to the impact of an enthusiastic
    six-year-old on the way home from school in [Queen's Park Gardens,
    formerly known as the botanic
    gardens](http://tcc.toowoomba.qld.gov.au/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=236&Itemid=166).
    I said “You know I'm riding beside you, don't you ...”. We tangled
    on the “you”. Nobody was seriously hurt. He got a good jab from the
    end of the drop handlebar.

3.  Went through the first set of front brake pads (right down to the
    metal) in 1500km. The guys at [Bikeline in
    Toowoomba](http://www.bikeline.com.au/) were astounded, as I don't
    do that much seriously downhill riding, but I worked out that it was
    from riding with my kids. I come home from school, about 1km, with
    brakes on just about all the way a few times a week. And maybe I'm a
    bit timid on some of the other downhill pitches around Toowoomba.

4.  One of the little plastic covers fell off one of the STI gear/brake
    levers. It appears to serve no function anyway, except maybe
    micro-aerodynamics.

5.  The Bontranger Race Lite (700x32) tyres are really hard to get off
    and on the rim. I found this out when I broke the valve on the front
    tyre (more than once) because I only had a hand pump. Then I broke
    the plastic tyre levers I bought when I got the bike. Then the tyre
    would not seat properly until I got a real pump and pumped it up to
    110psi.

    Kids, get a proper floor pump with a pressure guage. It was amazing
    how far under the recommended pressure **all** our bikes were.

6.  And those tyres are a bit slippery in the wet. Not that it rains
    much here, but when it did a couple of weeks ago I had a couple of
    little wobbles. I assume a bit of practice would be needed to know
    how far they can be pushed.

7.  Then I got my first puncture, and in the process of replacing the
    tube I:

    -   Blew up a tube with a spectacular gunshot-like crack at about
        100psi while I was pumping. I assume it was pinched somewhere.

    -   Bent the lip of the rim outwards presumably with tyre levers. I
        bent it back in with a hammer and a pair of pliers, as per the
        instructions
        [here](http://www.bikewebsite.com/bicycle-wheel-straightening2.htm).
        It's pretty straight now, but I had to adjust the brake pads to
        clear the wobbly bit.

Next step is to buy a trailer, to make trips to the markets,
supermarket, nursery, hardware store, and picnics  a bit easier. True, I
can put a whole box of apples on the front rack of the Apollo. And a big
load of veges in the back panniers. And more in a backpack. But a
trailer would be simpler. And I could hitch it to the 520.

I like the look of the [BicyleR Evolution
trailers.](http://www.chainringtransitauthority.com/store/shopper/shopper.shtml)
I have no desire to have  an
[xtracycle](http://www.chainringtransitauthority.com/store/freeradical/freeradical.shtml).

</div>
