---
Title: "Better news about lists in Microsoft Word. Microsoft is listening."
Slug: better_news_about_lists_in_microsoft_word._microsoft_is_listening.
Date: 2006-06-04

---
<div>

A few days ago I posted a [rather petulant
rant](http://ptsefton.com/blog/2006/05/29/lists_in_office_2007._not_pretty.)
about list support in Microsoft Word, partly in response to a Brian
Jones post about [list
support](http://blogs.msdn.com/brian_jones/archive/2006/05/26/607630.aspx)
in the OpenDocument format.

My post was about the painful interface to multilevel lists introduced
in Word 97 which has been through some minor tweaking and improvement
over subsequent versions. I have since decided that a more constructive
approach would be more useful, so I started planning a how-to post for
people wanting to use lists without tears.

Meanwhile, to my great surprise I got an email message from a Microsoft
PM (that means program manager, I think) called Stuart Stuple. Stuart
has taken the time to reply to some of the issues I raised. More needs
to be exchanged there before I can report.

But being able to rant and rave in public and have direct contact from
someone in Microsoft is a huge and very welcome change from the
treatment I got in 1997 when it seemed that you had to pay for a support
call to report a bug.

When Robert Scoble says that Microsoft is listening then I can tell you
that's true. He
[says](http://scobleizer.wordpress.com/2006/06/02/answering-rude-qa-from-jeff-jarvis/)
“we watch blogs for the harshest commentary and see if we can get
straight answers for you”. I wonder if it was this comment of mine about
Word's list galleries which qualified as harsh I
[said](http://ptsefton.com/blog/2006/05/29/lists_in_office_2007._not_pretty.):

> This is one the worst bits of interface design in the history of
> computing.

I'll correspond with Stuart and see if I can get the straight answers I
want. We have made a good start, though. As part of that discussion I'll
write up my 'how to' for lists in Microsoft Word.

</div>
