---
Title: "ETD 2007 - paper delivered"
Slug: etd_2007
Date: 2007-06-15

---
<div>

I'm at [ETD 2007](http://epc.ub.uu.se/etd2007/) right now. I gave my
talk yesterday morning, Swedish time. I sort of followed the thread of
[my paper](http://eprints.usq.edu.au/archive/00002653/) but I also gave
a demo.

I started with a joke that I got from a very clever child because it was
tenuously related to the conference.

We were chatting at home about who was smartest. The long suffering
Sandra said something along the lines of she was smart because she
recently got a degree. That made me smarter, cos I have two degrees and
an *Associate Diploma in Outdoor Education*.

Our daughter, who's nearly 9, without missing a beat held her arms up in
a big 'L' shape and claimed to have 90 degrees. That's 90<span
class="spCh spChxba">º</span>. I think that means she's very clever.

The feedback to my paper has been quite positive; looks like the
[ICE](http://ice.usq.edu.au/) content management system is going to get
a few new users. Bearing in mind the [comments from Tom
Worthington](http://www.tomw.net.au/blog/2007/04/creating-coordinated-web-pdf-and.html)
about how hard it can be to set up Subversion and ICE, if anyone who was
there would like help to try it out [drop me a
line](mailto:pt@ptsefton.com).

I got a mention in a talk by G. Sayeed Choudhury, in his talk on
usebility; he's talking about how literacies are changing, and mentioned
how the ICE demo showed how a thesis can be much more dynamic than just
a PDF or printed book.

Peter Murray-Rust was impressed with the potential for ICE, and he's
referenced it in [his talk, blogged
here](http://wwmm.ch.cam.ac.uk/blogs/murrayrust/?p=366).

Peter's presentation<span class="T2"> </span>*The Power of the
Electronic Scientific Thesis*<span class="T2"> </span>and *The
dissertation in an age of data driven humanities* by Greg Crane both
looked at ways that electronic texts can come alive if systems can look
into them and find semantics. Peter showed programs that recognize
chemical markup and render it visually, for example. We know we can do
this kind of thing with ICE, see [the way we can generate
slideshows](http://ptsefton.com/blog/2006/05/23/presenting_slidy_ice)
from documents that contain slide microformats.

Peter and I have started talking about how this might work with ICE
<span class="spCh spChx2013">–</span> I'll post more later when I've had
a look at the issue.

</div>
