---
Author: ptsefton
Comments: true
Date: 2007-12-11 02:43:33+00:00
Slug: clever-collections

Title: Clever Collections
Wordpress_id: 16
---

<div>

<div class="page-toc">

</div>

<div>

I'm a bad, bad blogger. I find it hard to write reviews of conferences
as I go, or even immediately afterwards, but I'm going to try to improve
on that in 2008.

This is far from liveblogging, but here are some notes of my impressions
from the [Clever Collections conference in
Melbourne](http://www.apsr.edu.au/clevercollections/index.htm) last
month. This post is expanded from my brief report for the
[RUBRIC](http://rubric.edu.au/) board.

Daniel de Byl and I ran a workshop on [ICE](http://ice.usq.edu.au/) the
day before the conference. We had a small, enthusiastic group who seemed
to get at least something out of the day. We'll see how many of the
attendees keep in contact. Past experience is that without the kind of
institutional support we provide at USQ, individuals don't tend to stick
with ICE (either that or they are very very self sufficient and don't
need to ask us or the ICE mailing list any questions).

**One surprise** was the talk by Professor Noshir Contractor, *From
disasters to WoW: enabling communities with cyberinfrastructure.* <span
style="font-style:normal; "><span class="T3">He </span></span>looked at
the way social networks affect how people do research, and how
understanding networks could make research more effective. There were
some striking examples of visualization tools that showed how research
articles and researchers are linked in various ways, going way beyond
the simple search and browse used in IRs at present. One example showed
two distinct networks of research and researchers working in the same
area, but with little overlap (research articles have their own social
networks apparently, through things like citations and keywords). I
think the example was from the NSA in the USA, looking at how they could
merge the networks somewhat.

Dr Ashley Buckle delivered a compelling argument, *The Australasian
Repository for Diffraction Images,* in favour of open access to research
data citing recent cases of scientific fraud in protein crystallography.

I was impressed by a whole session with APSR folks talking about their
work on repository interoperability.

[RIFF & the Australian METS profile](http://pilot.apsr.edu.au/wiki/index.php/METS_profile_development)
:   RIFF is the Repository Interoperability Framework which we'll be
    exploring in detail this week. The METS profile, developed by the
    National Library is a real improvement over the situation a couple
    of years ago <span class="spCh spChx2013">–</span> it should now be
    possible to create packages that can drop easily into both Fedora
    and DSpace <span class="spCh spChx2013">–</span> something we
    couldn't do at the start of the RUBRIC project.

[AONS2](http://www.apsr.edu.au/aons2/)
:   A utility for managing file formats in a repository and reporting on
    preservation issues.

[Fieldhelper](http://acl.arts.usyd.edu.au/fieldhelper/)
:   A repository client designed for field researchers such as
    anthropologists or archaeologists. It has some interesting features,
    such as the ability to group items and add metadata to all of them
    with a cute drag and drop way to apply metadata.
:   Have a look at the screenshots. I think the interface show some
    promise but the application needs a lot more work and a good deal of
    field testing.
:   I was inspired by the demo by Steven Hayes in which he automatically
    geo-tagged a set of images and packaged then for ingest into a
    repository to buy a cable for my GPS. Stay tuned.

Two of the presenters, Scott Yeadon and Leo Monus, are coming to USQ in
Toowoomba this week to a workshop we're holding on interoperability
between repositories and researcher-tools such as ICE and Zotero, as
well as workflow tools like the [Open Journal
System](http://pkp.sfu.ca/?q=ojs). More on that workshop/unconference
soon.

</div>

</div>
