---
Author: ptsefton
Comments: true
Date: 2008-06-06 22:45:11+00:00
Slug: why-wasnt-i-using-styles-in-diagrams

Title: Why wasn't I using styles in diagrams?
Wordpress_id: 122
---

<div>

<div class="page-toc">

</div>

<div>

I have said here many times <span class="spCh spChx201c">“</span>[use
styles](http://del.icio.us/ptsefton/usestyles)<span
class="spCh spChx201d">”</span>. So why wasn't I doing so when I could
have been?

Regular readers will know that I'm a bit word processor-obsessed. In the
word processor a style is name for a bundling of formatting and
structural information. For example, in most word processors if you use
Heading 1 style, then that helps to structure your document, and the
formatting is taken care of automatically; today 18pt Helvetica,
tomorrow 16pt Times. You can generate a Table of Contents automatically,
and you stand a better chance of getting good HTML export.

I don't think so much about diagrams.

This week I tried out [Cmap Tools](http://cmap.ihmc.us/), a concept
mapping application that we've been working with on the [ICE
project](http://ice.usq.edu.au/)because some of our courseware authors
use it to provide scaffolding for learners to use in constructing
knowledge. We are looking at taking this a bit further, under the
direction of Professor Jim Taylor, more on that soon.

I tested it out drawing a couple of architecture diagrams and I liked a
couple of things about it, one of which was the use of styles.

Here's a fragment of a concept map. The orange boxes are made orange
with a style called Data, and the yellow one is in style SoF, which is
the working name of the application we're building; SunOfFedora. If I
change my mind about the colours I can change the style and the diagram
will update itself.

<span
style="display: block"><a name="graphics1"></a>![graphics1](/wp-content/uploads/2008/06/3bbc7f7ds306x1651.jpg)</span>

The other thing I liked about Cmap is that it represents relationships
as propositions. It even shows your diagram in proposition form it you
want.

<span
style="display: block"><a name="graphics2"></a>![graphics2](/wp-content/uploads/2008/06/m6b3097a91.png)</span>

I decided that while Cmap is interesting, I don't want to use an
application that forces me to store things in a certain directory and
which loses my work by deciding that it's not going to save the map I've
been working on for an hour or so. And I'd like more flexibility about
the shape of the shapes I'm joining up.

I can achieve pretty much the same visual effect using the drawing tools
that come with OpenOffice.org; joining objects with connectors, and
putting labels on the connectors.

So I started redoing some of this work using Draw in NeoOffice <span
class="spCh spChx2013">–</span> and it struck me that I was going to
miss the Cmap approach to styles. But wait, Draw does have styles, it's
just that I have never noticed, and never thought about looking for
them. So for a few years I've been drawing dodgy diagrams and
inefficiently hand-formatting drawing elements to look alike, just the
same as many people use their word processor before discovering styles.

Now that I think about it, I must have heard of this feature, but I
never put two and two together and used it in my occasional diagramming.
One reason I never noticed, I think, is that it's not available in
Microsoft Office (and probably by extension in OOXML) which I was using
for many years; Microsoft set my expectations and I continued to expect
diagramming in an office suite to be painful.

[Use Styles.](http://del.icio.us/ptsefton/usestyles)

</div>

</div>
