---
Author: ptsefton
Comments: true
Date: 2008-01-29 06:11:21+00:00
Slug: '2008'

Title: '2008'
Wordpress_id: 82
---

Summer holidays have been wrung out to the last drop. Kids are back at
school. Time to start on 2008. [RUBRIC](http://rubric.edu.au/) is now
officially finished, except that we are keeping the tech team running
until the end of March to continue limited support for the RUBRIC
partners. The RUBRIC tech team have joined me in the Learning Futures
Innovation Institute; the [LFII](http://www.usq.edu.au/lfii). So it’s
time to start thinking about what we’re going to do in out new
institute. Of course we’re going to have to establish our plans through
proper channels but I will talk a bit about the projects we’ve already
got running and a few ideas for the future. There are two groups that
come under my area, in [my new
role](http://ptsefton.com/2008/01/02/new-job-manager-software-research-and-development-in-the-learning-futures-innovation-institute.htm):

1.  **The Software R&D lab**, where they’re working on the [Integrated
    Content Environment](http://ice.usq.edu.au/) (ICE); integrating it
    with Learning Management Systems (LMSs) and institutional
    repositories (IRs).
	
2.  **The new USQ Repository Services group**, led by Caroline Drury,
    where they’re doing the tail-end of RUBRIC tech support and looking
    after three clients (some of the contract details are still a bit up
    in the air so I won’t name names).

# <span id="id2"></span><!--id2--></a>Immediate future

The Repository services group are fully booked until the end of March,
with contracts continuing to the end of 2008. We need to see what role
we are able to play in the new Australian National Data Service (The
ANDS Technical Working Group 2007). For the R&D group we’re working a
major overhaul of the ICE interface and continuing to work on the
server-based version of ICE. During the last quarter the ICE system has
been moving towards a service-oriented approach (that’s ‘small soa’ as
they use the term in the [e-Framework for Education and
Research](http://www.e-framework.org/)). This means we have broken the
previously monolithic ICE into smaller pieces, and tried to make parts
of it available for use with other systems. One example of a service is
a forthcoming content conversion service for the *Moodle* LMS which will
let you upload **structured** word processing documents, created using
the ICE toolbar / templates into Moodle and return good quality HTML,
unlike the usual garbage you get from saving as HTML in your word
processor or using services like Google Docs. Another example is being
coded-up right now by Oliver Lucido. He’s working on a service to let
ICE authors include visualizations of stuff encoded in Chemical Markup
Language (CML) in their documents. I wrote about this mid last year
[with a simple demo](http://ptsefton.com/blog/2007/06/22/cml_demo/), now
we’re putting together a framework to support this kind of integration,
which we hope to extend when [Peter
Murry-Rust](http://wwmm.ch.cam.ac.uk/blogs/murrayrust/) visits us in a
couple of weeks. CML, of course is not everyone’s cup of tea but. I’m
hoping that our work on tools for chemists will expand into **tools for
other researchers in other disciplines**. We will continue to work on
general purpose stuff like authoring plugins for the
[Zotero](http://zotero.org/) bibliographic application.


# <span id="id3"></span><!--id3--></a>The future

Both the groups I’m working with are cogs in a big university machine,
so it’s not really up to us what we do, but here are a few things that I
think we have a good chance of working on:
1.  Most importantly, the Software group will be driven by USQ’s
    researchers in flexible learning, developing new tools on top of the
    IT platform we’re using at USQ. The platform includes
    [Moodle](http://moodle.org/), [ICE](http://ice.usq.edu.au/) and
    [ALIVE](http://www.alivex3d.org/) (serious games), with some
    proprietary tools for collaboration. I don’t know what software we
    will need to write, that depends on what the research tells us to
    try.
	
2.  Packaging the tools that we’ve developed and adapted at USQ for
    developing and delivering distance education, so that they can be
    used by others, particularly to produce [Open
    Courseware](http://www.ocwconsortium.org/).
	
3.  Continuing the work we’re doing on scholarly authoring and its
relationship to data, with tools for researchers and students.

4.  And finally, if there’s time we might investigate some of the things
    I’m thinking about now. Here’s three that spring to mind, but there
    are lots more:
    -   The [One Laptop per Child Project](http://laptop.org/) (note to
        **my** kids: this does **not** mean you. I’m thinking three or
        four laptops for daddy and one for the rest of the family to
        share). We should at least look at getting a [virtual
        one](http://chanson.livejournal.com/180680.html).
    -   An online document conversion service using ICE technologies
        running on something like [Amazon’s Elastic Compute
        Cloud](http://www.amazon.com/gp/browse.html?node=201590011),
        possibly generating money.
    -   Collaborative online document editing applications. [Stijn
        Dekeyser](http://www.sci.usq.edu.au/staff/Staff.php?Id=1073)
        from USQ’s Maths and Computing is interested in collaborating on
        this one.

The ANDS Technical Working Group. 2007. *Towards the Australian Data
Commons. A proposal for an Australian National Data Service*. Canberra:
Australian Government Department of Science Education and Trainining
http://www.pfc.org.au/twiki/pub/Main/Data/TowardstheAustralianDataCommons.pdf.

</div>

</div>
