---
Author: ptsefton
Comments: true
Date: 2008-09-02 23:30:26+00:00
Slug: put-on-the-fascinator

Title: Put on The Fascinator
Wordpress_id: 191
---

<div>

<span class="pdf-rendition-link">[View as
PDF](/wp-content/uploads/2008/09/thefascinator.pdf)</span>
<div class="page-toc">

</div>

<div>

At the [Australian Digital Futures
Institute](http://www.usq.edu.au/adfi) (ADFI, n<span
class="spCh spChxe9">é</span>e LFII) we have been working on a software
project, funded by our friends at [ARROW](http://arrow.edu.au/), to
build a lightweight web front-end to the [Fedora
Commons](http://www.fedora-commons.org/) repository software. It used to
go by the name of Sun of Fedora, which was just a temporary off the cuff
in-joke kind of a name. (It uses the [Apache
Solr](http://lucene.apache.org/solr/) search engine).

It now has a new name.

Choosing a name mainly consisted of the ADFI doing a lot of 'research'
on Google and Wikipedia and IMing each other lke crazy. The process
threatened to consume what remains of the project budget so we cut it
short after a couple of hours.

I suggested *Christine* after the *Siouxsie and the Banshees*
[song](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OMcLAsAzCmM) about a person with
multiple personalities on account of the software is used to show the
same repository in many different ways. Most of the ADFI staff turn out
to be too young, too inattentive or too sheltered to remember
*Christine* although I'm pretty sure it would have been on
[Countdown](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Countdown_(Australian_TV_series)).
It would have made for a good tag-line for the software.

> Now she's in purple, now she's a turtle.

Anyway, Bron Chandler suggested
[Fascinator](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fascinator), amongst many many
other names. I liked that one, as it's a kind of add-on to a hat and is
typically smaller than a
[Fez](http://espace.library.uq.edu.au/documentation/). It also sounds a
bit like 'facet' which is nice, as the software uses facets to help you
discover stuff in the repository. I think having an 'F' is nice too.
<span class="spCh spChx201c">“</span>The Fascinator, powered by
Fedora<span class="spCh spChx201d">”</span>.

This, from the
[current](http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fascinator&oldid=219836545)
Wikipedia page is apt for a bit of open source software:

> They are available pre-made, but are also quite easy and cost
> effective to self assemble. They are also sold in kit form.

Turns out *The Fascinator* is also the name of a [ragtime tune by James
Scott.](http://www.ragtimepiano.ca/rags/scott.htm#2) I haven't been able
to source an Open Access version you can listen to, but maybe someone
out there can knock it out for us using the [sheet
music.](http://www.ragtimepiano.ca/images/fascinator.pdf)[<span
style="vertical-align: super;"><span
class="footnote">\*</span></span>](#ftn1)

<a name="graphics1"></a>![graphics1](/wp-content/uploads/2008/09/111e4460s134x170.jpg)

*The Fascinator* it is.

It is not an acronym and very importantly it is not in upper case but we
await construction of a gratuitous
[backronym](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Backronym), from [the
man](http://andrew.treloar.net/) who brought you
[ARROW](http://arrow.edu.au/), [ARCHER](http://archer.edu.au/) and
[DART](http://dart.edu.au/) or from the
[creator](http://www.unisanet.unisa.edu.au/Staff/homepage.asp?Name=Prashant.Pandey)
of
[FABULOUS](http://www.fedora.info/wiki/index.php/Fedora_Tools#FABULOUS)
and Absolutely Fabulous.

We have soft-released the software before but now there is a new, open
[project site](http://ice.usq.edu.au/projects/fascinator/trac/wiki)
where you can download it, if you're comfortable with Subversion and
installing software on Linux and such. There are instructions for
Ubuntu.

*The Fascinator* will also be used in a project that [Caroline
Drury](http://sophiaca.wordpress.com/) and I are leading to take a
snapshot of the contents of Australian university institutional
repositories, partly to test the software and partly to give a series of
point in time snapshots of what is in them for research purposes. We'd
like to look at the range of ways people describe their content and
compare the way different repository platforms are used.

I road tested the name on *The Long Suffering Sandra*.

PT: You know that software I've been working on called Sun of Fedora?

SC: No.

PT: Well anyway, we're going to call it The Fascinator. Is that a good
name?

SC: Only if it's a project to do with hats.

PT: Well it is, it builds on Fedora, which is a kind of repository.

SC: In that case it's a stupid name, you don't put a fascinator on a
fedora.

Oh yes we do. Here's the [demo
site](http://rspilot.usq.edu.au:8080/sun-of-fedora). And besides, here's
a
[thing](http://www.etsy.com/view_transaction.php?transaction_id=8166760)
which is both a fascinator AND a Fedora. Unfortunately it's already
sold. (I hope [Glamour Bomb](http://www.etsy.com/shop.php?user_id=9048)
doesn't mind me borrowing this image).

<a name="graphics2"></a>![graphics2](/wp-content/uploads/2008/09/3fbba5f4s121x152.jpg)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div style="font-size: .9em;">

<span class="footnote"></span>
[\*](#ftn1-text) I wonder if anyone in the ADFI happens to be a piano
teacher in her spare time? (There are a couple of [tracks on
eMusic](http://www.emusic.com/search.html?mode=x&QT=%22The+Fascinator%22&x=0&y=0)
in case you're interested (no, I'm not an eMusic affiliate cos the form
was too scary)).

</span>

</div>

</div>

</div>
