---
Author: ptsefton
Comments: true
Date: 2008-01-02 05:59:47+00:00
Slug: new-job-manager-software-research-and-development-in-the-learning-futures-innovation-institute

Title: 'New job: Manager Software Research and Development, in the Learning Futures
  Innovation Institute'
Wordpress_id: 24
---

<div>

<div class="page-toc">

</div>

<div>

On December 22^nd^ 2007 I officially became the Manager, Software
Research and Development, in the [Learning Futures Innovation
Institute](http://www.usq.edu.au/lfii/) at the University of Southern
Queensland.

This means I will (at least) look after software development for the
[ICE project](http://ice.usq.edu.au/), and for the [OpenCourseware
Initiative](http://ocw.usq.edu.au/) at USQ, and will continue to guide
the repository work we started with [RUBRIC](http://rubric.edu.au/).

In the short term this means a swing back to looking at how ICE can be
used for courseware, continuing work on integrating it with Moodle both
for USQ and for our Open Courseware project as well as pushing into new
areas of e-learning. During 2008 we will also try to get involved in
work on the new Australian National Data Service[<span
style="vertical-align: super;"><span
class="endnote">1</span></span>](#ftn0), developing software and
processes to help e-researchers integrate data with publications
throughout the research lifecycle.

I'm honoured to be reporting to [Prof Jim
Taylor](http://apps.usq.edu.au/usqwebsite/aspnet/staffsearch/default.aspx?staffsearchaction=showdetails&staffsearchusername=taylorj),
who's heading the institute, but I'll also be sad that [Prof Alan
Smith](http://apps.usq.edu.au/usqwebsite/aspnet/staffsearch/default.aspx?staffsearchaction=showdetails&staffsearchusername=smith)
is no longer my supervisor. I'll still be looking to Alan as my guide
through the jungle of university policy, politics and procedure.

I'm only back at work for 3 days this week, before heading off on a road
trip to Kangaroo Valley so it will be mid January before we get the
Software R & D team together as a group. Meanwhile there's plenty to do
getting ready for an important demonstration of USQ's online
infrastructure in February.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div style="font-size: .9em;">

<span class="endnote">[1](#ftn0-text) The ANDS Technical Working Group,
*Towards the Australian Data Commons. A proposal for an Australian
National Data Service* (Canberra: Australian Government Department of
Science Education and Trainining, 2007),
http://www.pfc.org.au/twiki/pub/Main/Data/TowardstheAustralianDataCommons.pdf</span>

</div>

</div>

</div>
