---
Author: ptsefton
Comments: true
Date: 2009-01-06 02:11:53+00:00
Slug: potential-projects-2-integrating-ice-with-the-open-journal-systems

Title: 'Potential projects: #2 Integrating ICE with the Open Journal Systems'
Wordpress_id: 272
---

<div>

<div class="page-toc">

</div>

<div>

Back in December I was at the Open Access Publishing meeting in Sydney,
where I got to meet MJ Suhonos and John Willinsky from PKP. I [talked
about how ICE complemented software from
PKP](http://ptsefton.com/2008/12/11/scholarly-publishing-using-the-integrated-content-environment.htm).

Coincidentally, while I was writing up what I said at the meeting I got
an email from [Chris Rusbridge](http://digitalcuration.blogspot.com/)
wondering about whether ICE could help with a conference/journal
workflow. Papers from the International Digital Curation Conference
(like [ours](http://www.dspace.cam.ac.uk/handle/1810/206423)) flow
through to the [International Journal of Digital
Curation](http://www.ijdc.net/index.php/ijdc) (IJDC). The IJDC people
are apparently thinking about trying to make the journal available in
(X)HTML as well as PDF and to accept a broader range of submissions than
just Microsoft Word documents.

I think, but don't actually **know** that [ICE](http://ice.usq.edu.au/)
technologies could help with this.

So here's a second idea for a small project, adding ICE support to the
OJS journal system to see if providing templates-with-toolbars can work
for real live conferences and/or journals. Will authors use the
template? How well? Even if they only use it a little bit would it be
worthwhile? Do we need a system like PKP's
[Lemon8-XML](http://pkp.sfu.ca/lemon8) to add structure where authors
don't? (I think we do, but I don't yet know what it will look like.)

Here are some technical things we'd need to do to support a pilot/trial
(assuming we tackled the IJDC)s:

-   Adapt the APA template that they use for the journal so that it
    looks how the Journal editors want it to look, and document the
    process. (I did a proof of concept on this for our
    [submission](http://www.dspace.cam.ac.uk/handle/1810/206423) to the
    conference so I know it works).

-   Make a [Zotero](http://zotero.org/)/CSL citation style for the
    journal. (I made a start but it needs to be done properly) Should we
    bother with EndNote or is making an EndNote style too much of a
    legal risk these days?

-   Refine the work that Linda Octalina has been doing on getting ICE
    services embedded into OJS which will involve some conversations
    with the PKP team about the best integration points with their
    software.

-   Build on the[work that APSR did on OJS to repository
    deposit](http://www.apsr.edu.au/ore/) to add content to an
    appropriate repository.

</div>

</div>
