---
Author: ptsefton
Comments: true
Date: 2009-10-08 20:16:06+00:00
Slug: lesson-learned-from-the-australian-ir-experience-we-should-recognize-that-some-institutions-will-need-hosted-software

Title: Lesson learned from the Australian IR experience, we should recognize that
  some institutions will need hosted software
Wordpress_id: 378
---

<div>

<div class="page-toc">

</div>

<div>

I have been invited to speak at [DFRIC
2009](http://drfic2009.jp/index_en.htm) in Tokyo in December, and I'm
working on a paper with my [CAIRSS](http://cairss.caul.edu.au/)
colleague Kate Watson, to form the basis for my presentation, the
working title of which is *Suggestions for Asian/Australasian regional
cooperation based on a critical evaluation of collaboration and
standardization across Australian Institutional Repositories*.

We want to look at the history of collaboration in the Australian IR
space, and try to draw out some lessons for future efforts nationally,
regionally and globally. With the benefit of hindsight, I think that one
thing we could have done better in the main Australian Government funded
collaboration projects, [APSR](http://apsr.edu.au/),
[ARROW](http://arrow.edu.au/) and [RUBRIC](http://rubric.edu.au/) was
address the need for hosted repository solutions for small and/or
resource-limited organizations.

It's not that we didn't collectively understand or anticipate the
requirement. For example we looked seriously during RUBRIC at offering
hosted solutions after prompting from some of our partners, and USQ
(where I work, and the lead institution on RUBRIC) subsequently helped
two small Higher Education institutions to set up Eprints repositories
which are hosted by Southampton. UQ has looked at offering hosting in
the past for their Fez software. And since ARROW finished I have been in
discussions about hosting with people from more than one institution in
the extended ARROW family, using the VITAL software from VTLS. These
folks are considering the benefits of a hosted solution as they are
finding that even a vendor-supported on-site repository is too much to
manage, given the institutional context for repositories. We need to
keep this in mind in future projects.

Of course there are some commercial hosting providers in the market, and
that's good, but but we missed the opportunity while RUBRIC and ARROW
and APSR were running to put serious effort into investigating how those
solutions work with services like the NLA's [Australian Research
Online](http://research.nla.gov.au/), or how easy it will be for
institutions to migrate their data out of them when the time comes.
Evaluating commercial services other than VITAL was out of scope for
RUBRIC, something I would like to make sure we don't do in future
similar projects.

I have a few thoughts on this:

1.  For future collaborations, including forthcoming work on
    [ANDS](http://ands.org.au/) I think we should consider that some
    people will want a hosted solution and work with current and
    potential vendors to make sure that the interests of small
    institutions are represented. This might mean encouraging somebody
    to enter the market with an open-source based hosted solution.

2.  It has crossed my mind that maybe one or more of the larger
    institutions might like to consider hosting services for others
    alongside their main repository; this could be quite a low-cost
    service particularly if the smaller institutions are willing to
    accept very limited options for customization.

3.  Which leads to the idea that maybe we should be considering [what
    Alison](http://ptsefton.com/2009/07/08/wanted-someone-to-actively-sell-open-repository-solutions-in-australia.htm/comment-page-1#comment-605)[Dellit
    suggested here in a
    comment](http://ptsefton.com/2009/07/08/wanted-someone-to-actively-sell-open-repository-solutions-in-australia.htm/comment-page-1#comment-605)
    when I called for vendors to enter the market to support open source
    repository software. She suggested the 'one big repository'
    approach:

    > Open Access, preservation and user-friendly workflows could be
    > more easily facilitated through a single Australian repository
    > than through dozens of separate repositories, I think. And there
    > are institutions which could host such a thing, whatever
    > governance arrangements it would have. If it could go along with a
    > centralised system for identifying researchers and grouping their
    > work in sensible ways, it would be awesome.

    I don't think we'd necessarily see a single repository for everyone,
    but what if a large or well resourced institution decided to run a
    multi-institution IR or data repository where they rent out services
    to smaller institutions? Not just another instance of the software
    <span class="spCh spChx2013">–</span> the idea would let other
    institutions put stuff into one joint system, you'd be able to see
    each institution's stuff on it's own of course as well as search the
    whole lot.

    A major advantage would be that the institutions could share
    metadata standards and so, to reduce some of the problems inherent
    in federating or aggregating content where local customization has
    reduced standardization, although as Alison points out, local
    customization and integration is still a requirement.

Both 2 and 3 above could help a large institution pay some of their
repository management overhead, but could potentially still be cheaper
for small institutions that having software installed and maintained on
site. Curation workflows could either be done by each institution, or
could be taken on by the host.

Kate and I will be putting something along these lines into our paper,
but I am interested in feedback on these three points.

<span class="spCh spChxa9">©</span> Peter Sefton 2009. Licensed under
Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike 2.5 Australia.
\<<http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/2.5/au/>\>

</div>

</div>
