---
Author: ptsefton
Comments: true
Date: 2011-07-14 23:04:21+00:00
Slug: the-end-of-files-might-be-inconvenient-for-scholarship

Title: The end of files might be inconvenient for scholarship
Wordpress_id: 919
---

<div>

<div class="page-toc">

</div>

<div>

O'Reilly's Radar site has an [<span>post advocating a post-file
computing
paradigm</span>](http://radar.oreilly.com/2011/07/why-files-need-to-die.html).
It's a bit short on concrete details about how this might be
implemented, but it's something we need to think about in the context of
repositories and libraries, particularly because the main place this
post-file computing is being delivered is on the back of cloud computing
services and vertically integrated computing platforms like Apple's. I
talked this over with Duraspace CTO Bradely Mclean at Open Repositories
and we both agree that there are some real challenges here for digital
libraries.

It's not that people have not noticed the looming threat to academic
practice but I think that it is being underestimated. For example back
at the [<span>Australian Digital Futures
Institute</span>](http://adfi.usq.edu.au/) (ADFI) there's a post on
[<span>Apple's iCloud</span>](http://adfi.usq.edu.au/starlog/?p=16).
They note:

> iCloud is a way of Apple retaining its dominance of the smartphone
> market which has recently given ground to phones powered by
> Google<span class="spCh spChx2019">’</span>s Android system. This will
> improve how users access content from different Apple devices. But be
> warned, once committed to this system, it will be difficult to move
> away because it just won<span class="spCh spChx2019">’</span>t be
> convenient.
>
> [<span>http://adfi.usq.edu.au/starlog/?p=16</span>](http://adfi.usq.edu.au/starlog/?p=16)

But it's not just about the smartphone environment, it's about computing
in general and <span class="spCh spChx201c">“</span>it just won't be
convenient<span class="spCh spChx201d">”</span> is putting it mildly.
Think about what happens when you're using these vertically controlled
computing platforms to collect research data. You need to preserve the
data to be able to validate your research and comply with policy and
codes of practice and funder requirements. Or if you're using it for
teaching, how do you keep records and build portfolios?

How will we deposit this stuff in digital libraries?

I fear that it's a very small step from 'not convenient' to 'not
possible'.

Right now there are several major challenges for libraries and
repositories. One of the biggest, as many commentators have noted, is
the rise of the rental licensing model for content. This has already
happened for journals which are now sold as bundled electronic
subscriptions, making the notion of 'deposit' of materials extremely
problematic in many jurisdictions . We are now seeing related but
different changes to *book* licensing . With the rise of e-reader
devices we will see libraries cut out of many book transactions, with
readers purchasing content via vertical supply channels locked to
particular software and hardware stacks. Along with the huge
proliferation of e-book titles, many assembled by machines, this will
mean the notion of a library of legal deposit will be challenged in two
significant ways, by huge volumes of often dynamic bespoke materials,
and licensing that means much content now cannot be donated to a library
or lent-out.

Apart from licensing, the clouds (as in cloud computing) are gathering
for a potential storm in academic computing. The seductive benefits of
devices like Apple's iPad, iPhone and iPod are leading us to a potential
future where many research and teaching objects are produced using
highly specialised, proprietary *apps* (as opposed to applications such
as office-suites with open formats) which are routed directly to
vendor-controlled cloud storage. There is real potential that libraries
will lose contact with and control of research and cultural resources
altogether. We are seeing the disappearance of digital files, file
systems and the ability to even determine in what format ones data are
being stored. If we don't plan now it may not even be possible to
procure resources for preservation. The challenge is to make sure that
libraries have a tap into the information flows of the future, and the
right licensing and technological infrastructure to fulfil their
traditional role of depositing and disseminating those information flows
be they research, learning or cultural artefacts. We are faced with a
challenge which is quite different to digitisation or cataloguing of
physical objects.

There will be no quick answers, but I see the role of digital librarian
as one of both education and outreach as well as systems development,
making sure our academics and students understand these issues, together
with engineering solutions that allow the library to fulfil its role in
preserving and disseminating content that is created by our
institutions. To do this, we need to make sure the infrastructure is
there for libraries to tap into academic work-flows and new publishing
models. We need to make sure that authoring and creation tools for
viable preservable content are available, otherwise the scholarly record
as we know it may become impossible to maintain, and library collections
as we know them might become impossible to curate.

One area where libraries are increasingly relevant is in assisting in
the capture and husbandry of research data. Funder mandates world-wide
are now requiring that data be made available as open access by default
and discovery details for data be published, but we need to make sure we
don't embrace technology that makes that impossible.

So, while we're wondering, like ADFI how to use our iPads for teaching
and learning and looking forward to a file-less future the academy needs
t<span style="font-weight:normal; "><span class="T4">o speak up and tool
up for the post-file digital future.</span></span>

Copyright <span rel="http://purl.org/dc/elements/1.1/creator"
resource="http://trove.nla.gov.au/people/541658"><span
property="http://xmlns.com/foaf/0.1/name"
resource="http://trove.nla.gov.au/people/541658">Peter
Sefton</span></span>, 2011-07-15. Licensed under <span
rel="http://creativecommons.org/licence">Creative Commons
Attribution-Share Alike 2.5 Australia</span>.
\<http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/2.5/au/\>

<span class="Default_20_Paragraph_20_Font"><span
style="country:US; language:en; "><span
class="T1"><a><span></span></a>![graphics1](/wp-content/uploads/2011/07/m40ca94ba.png)</span></span></span>

This post was written in OpenOffice.org, using templates and tools
provided by the [<span>Integrated Content
Environment</span>](http://ice.usq.edu.au/) project.

</div>

</div>
