---
Author: ptsefton
Comments: true
Date: 2011-12-18 23:43:42+00:00
Slug: draft-eresearch-diagrammap

Title: Draft eResearch diagram/map
Wordpress_id: 986
---

<section itemscope="itemscope" itemtype="http://schema.org/ScholarlyArticle">
Today we’re having an eResearch strategic [UPDATE: strictly speaking IT
& Research] planning day at the University of Western Sydney. The
meeting has been organized by IT Services, which is a really healthy
sign of a commitment to taking eResearch seriously.

But what is eResearch?

The usual definitions say something about “Advanced IT and
communications technology in used for research” and some add stuff about
computation, collaboration, cross-discipline, and data-driven research.
I thought, I’d try to map this out for today’s meeting in this diagram.

Reading from the bottom to the top the idea is that there are some basic
eResearch enablers that need to be in place. The Australian Government
has recognized this and is funding national infrastructure, but each
institution obviously needs to have some of its own.

In the middle applications layer there are some services that we all
need, that are more-or less similar across disciplines, we need to be
able talk to each other, have mechanisms for sharing data, and the
organization needs to know about who’s doing what.

It’s well understood that a lot of eResearch services are not generic ,
so that’s the top cloud, where effective eResearch help needs to a be a
partnership between researchers and tech-specialists (sometimes they’re
the same people).

I’ll update this with feedback from UWS, interested in what others
think. Use the comments.

(ORS means Office of Research Services)

Copyright<span class="apple-converted-space"> </span><span><span>Peter
Sefton</span></span>, 2011-12-19. Licensed under<span
class="apple-converted-space"> </span><span>Creative Commons
Attribution-Share Alike 2.5</span><span
class="apple-converted-space"> </span><span>Australia</span>.
\<http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/2.5/au/\>

<span><span>[![](/wp-content/uploads/2011/12/Slide11.png "Slide1")](/wp-content/uploads/2011/12/Slide11.png)</span></span>

</section>

