---
Title: "Learning Management Systems not great at content management"
Slug: lms_content_management
Date: 2004-11-23

---
I was putting together some thoughts on the ways we should move beyond
the LMS walled community when [this piece by George
Siemens](http://www.elearnspace.org/Articles/lms.htm) appeared in the
RSS feed for the [lms tag on del.icio.us](http://del.icio.us/tag/lms).
It makes some good points about the limitations of an LMS. But the
author seems to think that these systems are doing an OK job with
content:

> Certain learning tasks are well suited for an LMS (centralized
> functions like learner administration and content management).

And:

> When content is viewed as the most valuable contribution to learning,
> an LMS will suffice. When interaction and connections are viewed as
> the most valuable aspect of learning, then other options - like social
> tools - are reasonable alternative.

I disagree that current Learning Management Systems (at least BlackBoard
and WebCT) do an adequate job of managing content.

I suppose you could do good content management in your average Learning
Management System, but they are basically set up to work as uninspiring
online collections of MS Word and Powerpoint documents. That's not
content management, that's file management, and quite often it descends
into file mismanagement.

Real content management is making content linkable and flexible, and
that takes work throughout the content lifecycle, setting up templates,
schemas and organization wide standards for both style and substance.

Furthermore I don't think that you have to distinguish between 'content'
on on hand and on the other 'interaction and connections'. Interactions
*are* content, and as I have [mentioned
before](http://ptsefton.com/blog/2004/11/18/transcending_the_lms),
*seed* content can be used to spark interaction. Content can and should
be extended dynamically throughout the learning process. But this
process is difficult to imagine when the content is not well prepared
technically for reuse and reconfiguration. No help there from the LMS
vendors.

So, while I agree with George Siemens that only certain parts of an LMS
are useful, I think they could do better on content. What's left, then?
The learner administration functions, gradebook, adding up marks and so
on.

I think there could be a good case to shift all interaction, including
quizzing and assessment into an advanced, *true* content management
environment and leave the LMS as an administrative assistant tallying up
marks, sending reminders about course fees and administrative deadlines
and reporting on numbers and so on. At USQ there already exists an
assessment system that plugs into the back end (PeopleSoft) systems and
integrates with an XML publishing system for print, so the housue LMS is
not even carrying a full load in the assessment area.

[update: fixed apostrophes](update:_fixed_apostrophes)

\$LastChangedDate: 2004-11-23 19:32:26 -0600 (Tue, 23 Nov 2004) \$
\$Rev: 83 \$
