---
Title: "Curation boundary: the line between collaboration and preservation"
Slug: curation-boundary
Date: 2007-02-07

---
<div>

At OpenRepositories 2007 in Texas, [Andrew
Treloar](http://andrew.treloar.net/) showed me this picture that he
developed along with colleagues at Monash,
[ARROW](http://arrow.edu.au/), [DART](http://dart.edu.au/) and
associated projects. There's a lot going on here, but I like the idea of
a **curation boundary**. [Fixed spelling on Andrew's name]

On the left of the curation boundary is work in progress, with less
metadata and general rigour, but more frequent updates. On the right is
where works go to be looked after in a longer time frame in a
repository.

(My spell checker doesn't like *curation*, it's suggesting *duration*
which kind of fits too).

Andrew's picture shows DART systems on top of the Fedora repository back
end but the idea applies to other combinations of research tools with
repository storage such as [APSR](http://apsr.edu.au/)'s work with the
[Open Journal System](http://pkp.sfu.ca/?q=ojs) and DSpace integration,
and with the work we're doing on ICE for Research and Scholarship
([ICE-RS](http://ice.usq.edu.au/introduction/ice_rs.htm)). ICE uses a
collaboration repository, which is based on Subversion. Later this year
ICE-RS project will show how finished collaborations can be archived
once they are ready to be shoved over the **curation boundary** <span
class="spCh spChx2013">â€“</span> I have already [mentioned our first
try](http://ptsefton.com/blog/2007/01/22/fedora-ims) with Fedora.

I had a bit of a rave the about the collaboration space in my [Workflow
2.0 piece](http://ptsefton.com/blog/2006/10/24/workflow_2_0).

(There was a presentation on APSR's work by Scott Yeadon at OR07, but I
hesitate to give you this link which contains an abstract, cos it
doesn't look very persistent to me. What happens next year?
<http://openrepositories.org/program/dspace>)

![graphics1](/blog/2007/02/07/curation-boundary/1.png)

</div>
