---
Title: "Tags make content"
Slug: tags_make_content
Date: 2005-08-06

---
I have previously written asking (and sort-of answered) [What is Content
Management?](blog/2004/12/08/what_is_content_management).

> My definition of content: Labeled, linkable data.

I go on in that post to talk about the attributes of Content Management,
contrasting it with related ideas like Knowledge Management.

I have just realized that tagging systems like
[del.icio.us](http://del.icio.us) let you make content out of stuff you
don't own, or can't change. Adding a tag is labeling something, in a way
that makes it linkable, discoverable. I even use it on my own site to
add categories like
[ContentManagement](http://del.icio.us/ptsefton/ptsefton+contentmanagement).

So if del.icio.us is a content management system, then by my way of
thinking a web page sitting on someone's server is 'just' data until it
is tagged, at which point it becomes a del.icio.us content item. This is
the same kind of distinction that people make between data and
information for humans; you need information to construct knowledge,
just as the content management system needs content to manage content.

Why am I telling you this?

I find the simple working defintion of content really useful in
evaluating solutions to various problems in and around content
management. Is this going to give me labelled data and I can use to make
links?

Why do we want to make links?

Links help humans use to construct knowledge, collections of unlinked
data don't help.

Of course labeled data is good for more than links - if you label some
parts of your documents as headings, for example, then you can get a
table of contents for free. So next time someone is demonstrating a
'Content Management' system to you ask if it can give you a table of
contents for each item. I reckon that tells you whether or not it's
really managing content.
