---
Title: "(it's"
Slug: caddie
Date: 2004-05-11

---title and you find this: \\\> Students will be expected to have their
own PC workstation or laptop \\\> (preferably running Windows 2000 or
XP) which must be capable of \\\> running the Microsoft.NET Framework
and Visual Studio.NET. The \\\> software is available to MIT registered
students as part of a grant \\\> from Microsoft. So it \\\*is\\\* a
Microsoft plot. I wonder if the grant stipulated that all courseware was
to be published in MS Word format? Ironically, some of the content is
written using the "[O'Reilly](http://www.oreilly.com) RTF Template for
Microsoft Word" which I understand is designed for authors to create
books that will end up being published in XML, in Docbook format. (try
this [Google
search](http://www.google.com/search?hl=en&lr=&ie=UTF-8&oe=UTF-8&q=%22O%27Reilly+RTF+Template+for+Microsoft+Word+%22&btnG=Search)
to see how many other people use it without changing the title.) Sadly,
a lot of the rest of it is written in ad-hoc Word, ie mostly Normal
style. So this is what MIT is going to give the world in the [Open
Courseware Initiative?](http://ocw.mit.edu/OcwWeb/index.htm). A bunch of
Word documents presented in the browser as a file system? Which brings
us (secondly) to [this
gem](http://iesl.mit.edu/web/skins/DocumentControl/ViewFile.aspx?FileID=c821df6a-f7b6-418e-b008-73e7e1f68551):
\\\> Suppose I teach a course and I have packaged everything up into a
\\\> single package of files. In the first lecture I have put links and
\\\> references to later lectures and so on, so the whole package is
\\\> tightly integrated. For me it's great because I know how I
structured \\\> everything. Yep, it \\\*\\\*does\\\*\\\* sound great.
But wait, here's a scoop! \\\#\\\#\\\# MIT says links considered
disastrous \\\> However, for you, who may want to use just part of my
material in your \\\> course it's a disaster. Instead of being able to
give you digestible \\\> bite sized pieces, you must swallow the whole
thing. Right, because my web page has links you have to swallow the
whole web? \\\> It would have been far better if I'd have built my
course in smaller \\\> self contained independent units. It would be
even better if those \\\> units had some standardized structure so that
if I understood one unit \\\> then picking up another would be easy
(hence the move towards \\\> "learning objects"). Excuse me, but
educational institutions and processes do not exist for the convenience
of the teachers, or to gratify reductionist software developers. Not to
mention the units on offer here are Word documents, with no discernable
standardized structure. (To be fair this quote is presented as an
analogy used to promote the idea of web services, it's clearly not an
MIT strategy statement, but the rest of the evidence is pointing in a
similar direction, so I'll keep ranting.) I work for an organisation
which in turn works for a number of educational institutions, many of
which are experienced, successful distance educators. They work hard to
construct richly interlinked course offerings, not to smash their
content into little bits. Why? because its \\\*\\\*great for the
learners\\\*\\\*. They, and publishers like O'Reilly who understand the
value of chunks of text larger than an ["Definition of 'reductionism,'
at the wikipedia" encylopaedia
entry](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reductionist) are apparently safe
from MIT, with its relentless drive to package learning materials as
stand alone paragraphs, each sealed in a web-proof Word document. If MIT
had all their content in the O'Reilly template then they'd be moving
towards learning objects. At this stage they're running the other way.
Stay tuned for some practical advice about how to turn your Word
documents into \\\*real\\\* web content.
